Korrasami is canon.

You can celebrate it, embrace it, accept it, get over it, or whatever you feel
the need to do, but there is no denying it. That is the official story. We
received some wonderful press in the wake of the series finale at the end of
last week, and just about every piece I read got it right: Korra and Asami fell
in love. Were they friends? Yes, and they still are, but they also grew to have
romantic feelings for each other.

Was Korrasami “endgame,” meaning, did we plan it from the start of the series?
No, but nothing other than Korra’s spiritual arc was. Asami was a duplicitous
spy when Mike and I first conceived her character. Then we liked her too much so
we reworked the story to keep her in the dark regarding her father’s villainous
activities. Varrick and Zhu Li weren’t originally planned to end up as a couple
either, but that’s where we took the story/where the story took us. That’s how
writing works the vast majority of the time. You give these characters life and
then they tell you what they want to do.

I have bragging rights as the first Korrasami shipper (I win!). As we wrote Book
1, before the audience had ever laid eyes on Korra and Asami, it was an idea I
would kick around the writers’ room. At first we didn’t give it much weight, not
because we think same-sex relationships are a joke, but because we never assumed
it was something we would ever get away with depicting on an animated show for a
kids network in this day and age, or at least in 2010.

Makorra was only “endgame” as far as the end of Book 1. Once we got into Book 2
we knew we were going to have them break up, and we never planned on getting
them back together. Sorry, friends. I like Mako too, and I am sure he will be
just fine in the romance department. He grew up and learned about himself
through his relationships with Asami and Korra, and he’s a better person for it,
and he’ll be a better partner for whomever he ends up with.

Once Mako and Korra were through, we focused on developing Korra and Asami’s
relationship. Originally, it was primarily intended to be a strong friendship.
Frankly, we wanted to set most of the romance business aside for the last two
seasons. Personally, at that point I didn’t want Korra to have to end up with
someone at the end of series. We obviously did it in Avatar, but even that felt
bit forced to me. I’m usually rolling my eyes when that happens in virtually
every action film, “Here we go again…” It was probably around that time that I
came across this quote from Hayao Miyazaki:

“I’ve become skeptical of the unwritten rule that just because a boy and girl
appear in the same feature, a romance must ensue. Rather, I want to portray a
slightly different relationship, one where the two mutually inspire each other
to live - if I’m able to, then perhaps I’ll be closer to portraying a true
expression of love.”

I agree with him wholeheartedly, especially since the majority of the examples
in media portray a female character that is little more than a trophy to be won
by the male lead for his derring-do. So Mako and Korra break the typical pattern
and end up respecting, admiring, and inspiring each other. That is a resolution
I am proud of.

However, I think there needs to be a counterpart to Miyazaki’s sentiment: Just
because two characters of the same sex appear in the same story, it should not
preclude the possibility of a romance between them. No, not everyone is queer,
but the other side of that coin is that not everyone is straight. The more Korra
and Asami’s relationship progressed, the more the idea of a romance between them
organically blossomed for us. However, we still operated under this notion,
another “unwritten rule,” that we would not be allowed to depict that in our
show. So we alluded to it throughout the second half of the series, working in
the idea that their trajectory could be heading towards a romance.

But as we got close to finishing the finale, the thought struck me: How do I
know we can’t openly depict that? No one ever explicitly said so. It was just
another assumption based on a paradigm that marginalizes non-heterosexual
people. If we want to see that paradigm evolve, we need to take a stand against
it. And I didn’t want to look back in 20 years and think, “Man, we could have
fought harder for that.” Mike and I talked it over and decided it was important
to be unambiguous about the intended relationship.

We approached the network and while they were supportive there was a limit to
how far we could go with it, as just about every article I read accurately
deduced. It was originally written in the script over a year ago that Korra and
Asami held hands as they walked into the spirit portal. We went back and forth
on it in the storyboards, but later in the retake process I staged a revision
where they turned towards each other, clasping both hands in a reverential
manner, in a direct reference to Varrick and Zhu Li’s nuptial pose from a few
minutes prior. We asked Jeremy Zuckerman to make the music tender and romantic,
and he fulfilled the assignment with a sublime score. I think the entire last
two-minute sequence with Korra and Asami turned out beautiful, and again, it is
a resolution of which I am very proud. I love how their relationship arc took
its time, through kindness and caring. If it seems out of the blue to you, I
think a second viewing of the last two seasons would show that perhaps you were
looking at it only through a hetero lens.

Was it a slam-dunk victory for queer representation? I think it falls short of
that, but hopefully it is a somewhat significant inching forward. It has been
encouraging how well the media and the bulk of the fans have embraced it. Sadly
and unsurprisingly, there are also plenty of people who have lashed out with
homophobic vitriol and nonsense. It has been my experience that by and large
this kind of mindset is a result of a lack of exposure to people whose lives and
struggles are different from one’s own, and due to a deficiency in empathy––the
latter being a key theme in Book 4. (Despite what you might have heard, bisexual
people are real!) I have held plenty of stupid notions throughout my life that
were planted there in any number of ways, or even grown out of my own ignorance
and flawed personality. Yet through getting to know people from all walks of
life, listening to the stories of their experiences, and employing some empathy
to try to imagine what it might be like to walk in their shoes, I have been able
to shed many hurtful mindsets. I still have a long way to go, and I still have a
to learn. It is a humbling process and hard work, but nothing on the scale of
what anyone who has been marginalized has experienced. It is a worthwhile,
lifelong endeavor to try to understand where people are coming from.

There is the inevitable reaction, “Mike and Bryan just caved in to the fans.”
Well, which fans? There were plenty of Makorra shippers out there, so if we had
gone back on our decision and gotten those characters back together, would that
have meant we caved in to those fans instead? Either direction we went, there
would inevitably be a faction that was elated and another that was devastated.
Trust me, I remember Kataang vs. Zutara. But one of those directions is going to
be the one that feels right to us, and Mike and I have always made both Avatar
and Korra for us, first and foremost. We are lucky that so many other people
around the world connect with these series as well. Tahno playing trombone––now
that was us caving in to the fans!

But this particular decision wasn’t only done for us. We did it for all our
queer friends, family, and colleagues. It is long overdue that our media
(including children’s media) stops treating non-heterosexual people as
nonexistent, or as something merely to be mocked. I’m only sorry it took us so
long to have this kind of representation in one of our stories.

I’ll wrap this up with some incredible words that Mike and I received in a
message from a former Korra crew member. He is a deeply religious person who
devotes much of his time and energy not only to his faith, but also to helping
young people. He and I may have starkly different belief systems, but it is
heartwarming and encouraging that on this issue we are aligned in a positive,
progressive direction:

“I’ve read enough reviews to get a sense of how it affected people. One very
well-written article in Vanity Fair called it subversive (in a good way, of
course)… I would say a better word might be “healing.” I think your finale was
healing for a lot of people who feel outside or on the fringes, or that their
love and their journey is somehow less real or valuable than someone else’s…
That it’s somehow less valid. I know quite a few people in that position, who
have a lifetime of that on their shoulders, and in one episode of television you
both relieved and validated them. That’s healing in my book.”

Love,

Bryan